---
layout:     post
title:      "RESTEasy 5.0.0 Released"
subtitle:   ""
date:       November 4, 2021 11:11:11 PDT
author:     James R. Perkins
---

I'm pleased to announce the release of RESTEasy 5. This is the first major release in some time now. Along with this
comes some big changes in RESTEasy. Some details were announced [in a previous post]({% post_url 2021-09-23-announcements-and-releases %}).
More details on the release below.

## Jakarta RESTful Web Services

RESTEasy 5 is a Jakarta RESTful Web Services 2.1 implementation. This version has been tested on WildFly and fully 
passes the Jakarta RESTful Web Services TCK.

## Galleon Feature Pack

The previous `resteasy-jboss-modules.zip` has been removed and replaced with a Galleon Feature Pack. You can now simply
install the Galleon Feature Pack over a pre-existing configured WildFly container or install it from scratch.

```bash
install org.jboss.resteasy:galleon-feature-pack:5.0.0.Final
```
 
## Moved Components

There are some components that have moved out of RESTEasy and into their own projects. These moves happened for two
reasons. One was they just seemed to be a better fit outside the core RESTEasy. The other is to help move forward with 
[Jakarta RESTful Web Services 3.0](https://jakarta.ee/specifications/restful-ws/3.0/).

### RESTEasy Cache

RESTEasy cache was removed from the core RESTEasy project to [resteasy-extensions](https://github.com/resteasy/resteasy-extensions/tree/main/cache).
The Maven group ID and artifact ID have changed from `org.jboss.resteasy` and `resteasy-cache-core` to 
`org.jboss.resteasy.cache` and `cache-core` respectively.

### RESTEasy MicroProfile

RESTEasy previously had integrated [MicroProfile Config](https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile-config) sources, a
[MicroProfile REST Client](https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile-rest-client) and 
[MicroProfile Context Propagation](https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile-context-propagation) integration. These have
now been moved to their own [repository](https://github.com/resteasy/resteasy-microprofile). With this comes new Maven
group ID's, artifact ID's and versions.

The MicroProfile Config Sources were moved out of `org.jboss.resteasy:resteasy-core` into their own project,
`org.jboss.resteasy.microprofile:microprofile-config`.

The MicroProfile REST Client and MicroProfile Context Propagation have new Maven GAV's.

| Old | New
| --- | ---
| `org.jboss.resteasy:resteasy-client-microprofile` | `org.jboss.resteasy.microprofile:microprofile-rest-client`
| `org.jboss.resteasy:resteasy-context-propagation` | `org.jboss.resteasy.microprofile:microprofile-context-propagation`

The simplest way to use these dependencies is to import the BOM:

```xml
<dependencyManagement>
    <dependencies>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>org.jboss.resteasy.microprofile</groupId>
            <artifactId>resteasy-microprofile-bom</artifactId>
            <version>${version.org.jboss.resteasy.microprofile}</version>
            <type>pom</type>
            <scope>import</scope>
        </dependency>
    </dependencies>
</dependencyManagement>
```

### RESTEasy Spring

RESTEasy Spring integration has also moved to its own [project](https://github.com/resteasy/resteasy-spring). Only the
group ID has changed on these from `org.jboss.resteasy` to `org.jboss.resteasy.spring`. Like the MicroProfile the 
simplest way to get these dependencies is with the BOM import.

```xml
<dependencyManagement>
    <dependencies>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>org.jboss.resteasy.spring</groupId>
            <artifactId>resteasy-spring-bom</artifactId>
            <version>${version.org.jboss.resteasy.spring}</version>
            <type>pom</type>
            <scope>import</scope>
        </dependency>
    </dependencies>
</dependencyManagement>
```

## Removed Components

RESTEasy Guice has been completely removed from RESTEasy. As far as we could tell this was not a popular module and was
getting rather stale. There is currently no replacement for this component.

## Java SE 17 Support

RESTEasy 5 is now tested and working with Java SE 17.

## Upcoming Changes

RESTEasy is going to migrate to [Jakarta RESTful Web Services 3.0](https://jakarta.ee/specifications/restful-ws/3.0/). 
The only change in this release will be migrating from the `javax` namespace to `jakarta`. The plan is to make this 
change immediately and move the version to RESTEasy 6.