---
layout:     post
title:      "RESTEasy 6.1.0.Final Release"
subtitle:   ""
date:       August 2, 2022 11:11:11 PDT
author:     James R. Perkins
---

We are happy to announce the final version of [RESTEasy 6.1.0.Final]({{ site.baseurl }}/downloads#610final). This is our first final release implementing the
[Jakarta RESTful Web Services 3.1](https://jakarta.ee/specifications/restful-ws/3.1/) specification.

### What has changed in Jakarta RESTful Web Services 3.1

There have not been a lot of [major changes](https://jakarta.ee/specifications/restful-ws/3.1/jakarta-restful-ws-spec-3.1.html#changes-since-3.0-release) 
in Jakarta REST 3.1. However, below are a some highlights.


#### [Java SE Bootstrap API](https://jakarta.ee/specifications/restful-ws/3.1/jakarta-restful-ws-spec-3.1.html#se-bootstrap)

This introduces a way to bootstrap a REST server. This can be very helpful for unit tests or just running in Java SE.
With RESTEasy you need to add one of the following dependencies to get the `SeBootstrap` to work.

* `org.jboss.resteasy:resteasy-undertow-cdi` (preferred)
* `org.jboss.resteasy:resteasy-undertow` (preferred)
* `org.jboss.resteasy:resteasy-netty4`
* `org.jboss.resteasy:resteasy-vertx` (SSL not implemented)

Note that a custom implementation of the `org.jboss.resteasy.plugins.server.embedded.EmbeddedServer` can also be used.
This is the replacement for the deprecated `org.jboss.resteasy.plugins.server.embedded.EmbeddedJaxrsServer`. However,
if you already have a custom implementation of `EmbeddedJaxrsServer` that can be used as well.

The Undertow implementations are the preferred implementations. This is what RESTEasy uses for the Jakarta REST 3.1 TCK.

#### [CDI Support](https://jakarta.ee/specifications/restful-ws/3.1/jakarta-restful-ws-spec-3.1.html#context-injection)

In Jakarta REST 3.1 the `@Context` is [deprecated](https://jakarta.ee/specifications/restful-ws/3.1/jakarta-restful-ws-spec-3.1.html#context-injection).
While `@Context` is still currently supported, future versions may remove support.

With this, RESTEasy has added some support for injecting the known types which `@Context` also injects. One note is this
currently does not work with method parameter injection. The following types can be injected as global fields in CDI
managed beans.

* `jakarta.ws.rs.core.Application`
* `jakarta.ws.rs.client.Client`
* `jakarta.ws.rs.core.Configuration`
* `jakarta.ws.rs.core.HttpHeaders`
* `org.jboss.restesy.spi.HttpRequest`
* `jakarta.ws.rs.ext.Providers`
* `jakarta.ws.rs.core.Request`
* `jakarta.ws.rs.container.ResourceContext`
* `jakarta.ws.rs.core.SecurityContext`
* `jakarta.ws.rs.sse.Sse`
* `jakarta.ws.rs.core.UriInfo`


#### [Services](https://jakarta.ee/specifications/restful-ws/3.1/jakarta-restful-ws-spec-3.1.html#services)

Section [4.1.2](https://jakarta.ee/specifications/restful-ws/3.1/jakarta-restful-ws-spec-3.1.html#services) of the spec
defines a `ServiceLoader` must be used to locate `jakarta.ws.rs.core.Feature` and `jakarta.ws.rs.container.DynamicFeature`.
This can be enabled if your `Application.getProperties()` contains a key of `jakarta.ws.rs.loadServices` with a value
of `Boolean.FALSE`.

#### [Default Exception Mapper](https://jakarta.ee/specifications/restful-ws/3.1/jakarta-restful-ws-spec-3.1.html#exceptionmapper)

A default `jakarta.ws.rs.ext.ExceptionMapper<Throwable>` is now required for an implementation. This can easily be
overridden by defining your own `ExceptionMapper<Throwable>` as a `@Provider`.

#### Deprecations

The `Link.JaxbLink` and `Link.JaxbAdapter` inner classes have been deprecated. The `Cookie` constructor as been 
deprecated in favor of the `Cookie.Builder` as has the `NewCookie` in favor of `NewCookie.Builder`.


### RESTEasy Quickstarts

As [mentioned previously]({% post_url 2022-07-21-resteasy-releases %}) there is a new [quickstarts](https://github.com/resteasy/resteasy-quickstarts)
project. While there is currently not a tag for 6.1.0.Final, in the future there will be. This is currently a work in
progress.

### New Features

While there have not been many new features in RESTEasy itself, there has been one new [client utility](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/RESTEASY-2856) introduced. 
Currently, this contains some client authentication filters.